## Health Informatics

* [Health Informatics on FHIR: How Hl7's New API Is Transforming Healthcare](https://www.amazon.com/Health-Informatics-FHIR-Transforming-Healthcare-dp-3319934139/dp/3319934139/): This book won't teach you to develop applications using FHIR; I don't think there's a substitute for the (voluminous) online documentation on HL7's web site for that. But what it _will_ do is give you a great overview of the Health Informatics landscape, its evolution from early days to now, and how FHIR fits in. There are plenty of use cases, and because this is a recent book, links to online tools and information that actually work. The promise of FHIR isn't 100% delivered yet but it's clearly the best bet currently for interchanging information among disparate parts of the medical informatics system. (Reviewed by Mike Gunderloy)
* [Principles of Health Interoperability: Snomed CT, Hl7 and Fhir](): If there's a better overview of interoperability for healthcare systems I sure haven't found it yet. This is the third edition, newly expanded with coverage of FHIR, but that's only a so-far-minor part of the interoperability landscape. The book starts with a discussion of health informatics and why interoperability is hard - one of the most valuable things here is that nothing is sugar-coated. Healthcare is an incredibly complex field and there are numerous disparate standards for (attempting to) exchange information. After laying down some of the basics (modeling, UML, XML, JSON) it looks briefly at governance and standards development, and then dives into high-level overviews of major standards, including SNOMED CT, HL7, CDA and of course FHIR. You won't be an expert in any of these technologies, but by the time you finish the book you'll have a good grasp of the overall landscape. The book is flawed by too many editing errors, but it's also undeniably essential. (Reviewed by Mike Gunderloy)